Gabe Aron
Bikram Yoga Presentation

History - 
In the early 1970's in Japan, founder Bikram Choudhury had the idea
Choudhury, a yoga teacher at the time, noticed that his students took saunas during their lunch breaks.
(this follows the Japanese tradition of Onsen, or hot baths)
This lead him to incorporate a set of the traditional Hatha asana series (the physical postures of yoga  popularized in the west)
with a heated medium.
Originally meant to simulate the heat of his home in Calcutta India (80f), he ended up increasing the heat to (104f)
upon observing the added sweating and exercise that this provided practitioners.
Bikram Yoga, as it has been branded, took off in the US in the 1980's in Hollywood.
From there, the practice spread around the world.
After falling out of favor with the public in 2013, devoted practitioners now find themselvs looking for ways 
to continue the practice while distancing themselves from the founder.

The practice -
Consists of 26 Hatha Asanas in a heated room
Each session of this practice lasts approximately 90 minutes and follows the same sequence of Asanas in the same order each time
No matter where you are, if it says Bikram, you know what to expect
Each session is taught by a certified instructor with the same dialogue designed by Choudhury

What to expect - 
Your first day will most likely be hot, challenging and at times even overwhelming
Come well hydrated, with a mat, a waterbottle, two towels and a bathing suit / shorts
There is a lobby, a hot room, showers, and two locker rooms
Take off your shoes at the door of the lobby upon entering
Sign in at the front desk. Rates vary, but tend to be about $12 - $20 for a dropin and $100 - $150 for a month unlimited package
You will want to change into the bathing suit / shorts before making your way to the hot room
Go into the hot room with mat, a towel and a water bottle
Place mat in front of the wall-to-wall mirror. Make sure you can see yourself. Place towel on top of the mat.
An instructor (usually the same person who was at the front desk) will walk in shortly after and begin the class.
Follow the verbal instructions provided, making sure to always give yourself permission to sit down, lay down or even leave
the room if things get too intense. 

Why the heat?
heat increases circulation by increasing heart rate
relaxes the muscles to increase flexability
feels good
increases lymph fluid which boosts the ammune system
acclimatizing to hot surroundings has been proven to increase indurance and muscle growth

Sweating? What's the point?
Hype about flushing out toxins. This is unfounded (unless water, salt and magnesium are toxic).
We sweat because our bodies have to regulate their temperature.
This said, there is some research being done into the empirical ties between sweating and the production of 
Dermcidin (an antiboitic) and its theoretical ability to treat certain superbugs.

Heat illness?
The exercise and heat cause the body temperature to increase
According to studies, average students were found to have a max core temp of 103f
104f is considered the beginning of heat illness
While rare, there have been a few reported cases of heat illness (exhaustion)
These cases were mostly among people who were dehydrated or overexerted themselves
conclusion:
Staying hydrated before, during and after class is crucial
dress lightly
give yourself time to acclimate to the heat, and give yourself breaks if needed
Listen to your body. If you are sick, you'll know.
Don't do everything the instructors tell you to do. They don't know as well as you.
Stop if you start to feel feverish, dizzy, lightheaded, confused, or nauseated.
But try to recognize the difference between true hazard and mere discomfort.

Extra:
Heat througout cultural practices
Sweating for health and transformation is something common to almost every culture on earth.
japanese onsen bath
roman bath houses
ayurveda steam baths
Mayan temascal
Turkish baths
Finnish sauna

Hot yoga is a bit different from these cultural practices because it is recent and uses a single authority as
opposed to a lineage of traditional knowledge.
Good because its future is volatile and determined by those who practice it, as opposed to an essoteric clergy
Bad bacause its manifestations lack certainty.

https://yogainternational.com/article/view/hot-and-bothered-the-hype-history-and-science-of-hot-yoga
https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=2&v=796kNNslyLg
https://www.bikramyoga.com/
http://www.consumerreports.org/cro/2014/02/dangers-of-hot-yoga/index.htm
  